You are listening to radio lab radio from W.
N y.
S. T. E. N. N. P. E. R. N. I assume we're live on the air now.
Uh Huh.
We don't do that. You have you guys ever talk to each other? I don't think so.
No. Oh, this. Oh, this is Caribou, right? Well Hi, this is Jim Glick. Hey,
how are you? Fine. How are you? Pretty good. Good. Rainbows,
rainbows, rainbows. Okay, so we're going to start today with author James Glick.
As I recall, you wanted to talk about Isaac Newton. That's right.
We did call them and talk about Isaac Newton, but more specifically colors.
All right. Isaac Newton. He's 23 years old.
1665 and he's, he's home for the holidays. No, there's no holiday.
He's home for the play. It was actually a plague.
They sent everybody home from school. In any case,
he's in his room famously solving all these mysteries of the world.
And one of the questions that he thinks about during this break is what are
colors? Where do they come from?
Like when I see the color red, is that red?
Is it inside my head or is it something that exists sort of out there in the
world? Yes. The light without or is the light within?
Yeah.
Hmm. So he pokes a knife into his eye. The coat he was, what do you mean?
Here's what Newton wrote in his notebook. I took a Botkin,
put it twixt my eye on the bone as near to the backside of my eye as I could and
pressing my eye with the end of it.
Whoa. Whoa.
It appeared several white dark colored circle.
Did that lead him to some conclusion about where the spots live,
whether they're outside or inside? No,
didn't get them very far cause seeing spots when you poke your eye,
it doesn't tell you much about what color is. But um, what he did next did,
and this one needs a little more famous for, he got himself a prison,
which is just a bit of glass shape, like a pyramid.
It wasn't so easy for him to get his hands on a prison, but he did.
Then he shot his blind. So the rumors totally dark,
but he poked a little hole in one of the blinds and then he waited and the son
had to be at just the right angle
and he waited.
And when the sun got to just the right spot,
a ray of light shot through the room.
Newton immediately stuck his prison into the light and the light shattered
[inaudible]
and became a rainbow on the road
or in Newton zone. Words colored image of the Sun.
Yeah, that's gorgeous, isn't it? A colored image of the sun.
That's Victoria Finley. She wrote a book about color and she says,
the thing to understand about this experiment is it,
at the time people believed that white light was given by gold or given given by
this amazing thing called nature. The light from the sun was sort of holy. Yeah.
If there was anything that was pure, it was white.
So when the prism did the rainbow thing, which people, new prisons did,
they just figured the colors are in there and the glass. In other words,
that rainbow had nothing to do with the light itself. That was just the prism.
Adding some kind of impurities to the light. Oh Wow.
I haven't thought of the possibility that the prison is muddying.
The light is polluting the light.
How do you know that the prison isn't generating these colors?
So he got a second prism, and this was the trick.
While the first prison was still making that rainbow on the wall,
he moved a few feet away and he held up a second prison in the blue area to see
what would happen to the blue light with the prison,
add more colors to the blue light or would it be transformed in some other way?
And what he found was nothing happens.
It remains blue. So he thought, hmm,
if the blue light isn't getting muddied by the prison and maybe the prison
wasn't muddying the white light to begin with,
maybe that rainbow of colors was actually coming from inside the white line.
He inferred that the first prism is dividing light into its constituent parts,
which means that the white light we see around us is actually constituted all of
these colors. The colors were in the light. They are the light.
He had his answer. Light is a physical thing in the physical world.
You can tweak it, test it, study it.
This was the beginning of everything we know about light today.
Newton put us on the road toward finding that ultraviolet rays, x-rays,
radio waves,
they're all different energies of light in colors or just energies within that
little sliver that we can see.
And that has led to our understanding of the greenhouse effect,
knowing what stars are made of, even the age of our own universe.
Uh,
not everybody was pleased by this. A little bit later. John Keats,
the romantic poet who was really crossed with him in, in a,
in a poem because they said he reduced,
removed all the poetry of the rainbow and the real challenge to Newton's view of
color. One that would really stick oddly enough, it did come from a poet,
not Keith's, but at the poet named Gerta. Yeah. Yes.
Is this German romantic poet, um,
that is authored Joanel air regularly with us who writes about this kind of
thing. And always wonderfully.
One day he is walking in the park and he spots these yellow crocus's and he
looks at the Yellow Crocus, isn't it Myers? They're pedals. It's in,
it's early spring and they're blooming.
And then it quickly turns away and in an instant
he suddenly sees his dash a violet crosses eyes.
You still sees the shape of the flower, but now it's violet.
It's the opposite of yellow. He hadn't rubbed his eye and stuck a needle in it,
and yet there it was, seemed just as real,
as real as the yellow crow. But he knew it wasn't real.
It came from inside his mind and it was, you know something,
you know we've all hallucinated colors.
You can press on your eyeball or close your and you see this riot, a fireworks.
But for Gerta,
that simple observation leads him to think that may be color isn't simply about
the external universe. And maybe our perception of colors began in the world,
but maybe it was finished inside the mind. And today,
hundreds of years later, this is still an open question.
A scientist can say color has an objective reality,
but the colors we see are tricks of the imagination.
Whoa.
And there is no perfectly objective view of color. I personally,
I like to keep both of those opinions in mind at the same time.
[inaudible]
me too. Me Three
well lucky for us.
We're going to do a whole show of this. I'm Jad Abumrad I'm Robert Krulwich.
This is Radiolab and today it's all about color. Yes,
we're is color. Is it in, is it out? That's the question. Yeah.
We're going to explore that question through the eyes of a butterfly in the
killing fields of Cambodia with a woman who may see colors the rest of us can
only dream of.
And we'll go back to a time when the sea apparently looked like dark red wine.
Stick this in your ear holes cause we're about to get color. Yeah.
[inaudible].
And by the way, before we get rolling,
just want to say we did something kind of different for us while making this
hour, we put out this call to a bunch of musicians,
solo artist bands to send us their favorite color songs,
their own interpretations of their favorite color song.
[inaudible]
you got an amazing response.
So throughout this hour you're gonna hear color songs of various kinds, uh,
woven into some of the pieces between the pieces, those songs. By the way,
we have plans for, yeah, big plans. You can go to our website,
radiolab.org to get a full list of the songs. I hadn't. Thank you. By the way.
Everybody who sent us the songs yet.
Absolutely.
Okay. So, uh, should we go? Yes. Let's ask. So to, to get things going. Um, hey,
hey, he's here. You're here. He is.
Not long after we talked to Jim Glick about Sir Isaac Newton,
we had talked to a neuroscientist by the name of Mark Chinkies.
I'm going to grapes if that's all right with, you know,
who had written a book about color. Would you like some grapes? I know thing.
And we threw the question at him.
So one of the sort of debates that became interesting to us is this,
where is the color? Is it out there? I mean,
is this great that I'm holding right now?
Is it red for everything that'd be a whale? I mean, is this,
does it exist in a way that you can pin down and say it's outside me or does it
only get to be red when it gets in my head? Well,
you can another way, a more severe way to, to ask this,
and I asked this whenever I'm giving talks,
is just would aliens see it as red or would would aliens see it as red? Right?
And the answers almost surely no truth. This says mark,
even your dog wouldn't see it as red. Oh, your dog has color. Vision has blue,
yellow and black. White. Really? Yes.
So what would the world look like to a dog? I mean,
if you've ever known a guy who's color blind too, and 10% of men are colorblind,
that's roughly what it's like. Huh? Well, here's the question.
If a dog and the human and
a crow where could be staring at a rainbow,
would they be seeing very different things? Yes.
Now this question that Robert just kind of tossed out during an interview with
like about how different creatures would see the rainbow.
This ended up taking us down a little worm hole and we ended up actually getting
a choir to help us illustrate, uh, what we learned.
But just to set a baseline, your normal rainbow goes like this,
starting bottom up.
[inaudible]
red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet, Roy g bit. Where'd you bev? Yeah.
I don't know why people put the I in there, but that's it.
If you didn't have the indigo, you couldn't say it though, be Roy.
Did you believe that's why you need the, I think that is to say the red jeep,
if you know that by the way, is Tom Cronin I bought,
it's called a visual ecologist. Mark suggested we give him a call.
He told us that humans seat seven colors in the rainbow
in the, in the case of the dog, very different rainbow. Uh,
it's going to start off blue. He'll be able to see blue just fine.
So what was he a rainbow starting with blue.
Same blue we see and then grading off into
green [inaudible] same green as us and then disappearing here.
You mean go in there with a tiny bit of yellow thrown in? That's it. Yeah.
So the rainbow will be only be about half as thick as ours. Wow.
It's a sucky rainbow dog. Yeah.
That's why when God promised that he would never deliver another delusion,
he gave a paper, made the promise in the rainbow.
The dogs just totally unimpressed.
And what is it about the dog I that makes it see this way it doesn't have red
sensitive photo receptors. No red sensitive cones.
The weird thing is that the difference between dogs and us cone wise is just
one. They have cones tuned to blue and green. So do we.
But we have this one extra red, which doesn't really seem like a big difference.
I mean it's just one cone, but I have three.
It's so much better than two. That's Jane night's vision.
Scientists because of this kind of multiplicative thing.
Red Can get mixed with blue chinks, purple
or red can get mixed with yellow to make orange green to mixed with blue to get
teal or turquoise.
That's how we get about a hundred different shades of color that we can see.
So by adding one photo pigment, instead of adding just one more color,
you actually add about 98 colors yourself. All right, let's move on.
So now we have a crow. Unless you'd like to change the bird.
Well the crow is not [inaudible] cause it's pretty much like us.
So let's take a look. Psycho off something like a um, a sparrow, right?
Cause sparrows have ultraviolet vision. What do they see?
So they see the rainbow starts before our rainbow starts where we just see sky,
it would see an ultraviolet color,
then it would see the
Greens and the oranges
and then the red and probably would see further into the red rhythm has because
they have the more red sensitive red receptor than we have.
So you want see a much broader rainbow.
Let's start earlier and it would end later.
Woo.
So should we assume that we've now that this bow is the champion,
that that's the, that's that's as high as it gets.
If you're talking about Verda breaths,
[inaudible] thing that has a heart and a mind and a,
once you leave the vertebrates, then all bets are off.
You've got many animals have much better color vision than the vertebrates.
Oh yeah. Like what? Butterflies are a great example.
Butterflies have five or six kinds of res of color receptors.
We only have three. Remember butterflies see more colors than we do.
Yeah. So if a butterfly, we're looking at a rainbow,
so, well they do, I'm sure.
I mean butterflies are out there and when the game are out, but it was e colors.
We have no names for between the blues and the Greens and the Greens and the
yellows. Woo. So it would go from ultraviolet. It would see that. Yup.
Then it would see violet and then blue and then blue,
blue, green, Yup. In Green, green, blue, blue e or whatever.
Right. And then the orange and red and all that.
Yup.
Very complicated eyes, Huh. Okay. So just to recap. All right, here's the dog.
[inaudible]
here's US humans.
Uh Huh.
Now the sparrow
[inaudible]
bit more base, a little bit more high end, so to speak.
And finally the butterfly
[inaudible] which
is, you know, not so far above the sparrow, but it's got more mids in there.
So I'm not thinking butterfly butterflies get the crown. Yeah,
but then you go under Carl reefs.
You come across these animals called mantis shrimps. What are they called?
Metta. Like Mantis, like a praying mantis. Oh, mantis shrimp.
The shrimp catches pray using an arm, like a praying mantis has. Oh,
I've managed shrimps or are mostly pretty small about the size of a finger.
Some get to be as big as your forearm break. Big Animals.
I'm actually looking this up right here. Oh. Oh my God.
They're so colorful. No, they are colorful though. You're here. Look at this.
Oh my God. They're just like a, it's like they're electric colored. Yeah.
Like Turquoise or something that you're a decile and their eyes are like little
cartoonized. They're gigantic. Yeah.
They have two really big eyes right on the front.
And you said that dogs have two cones. We have three.
How much does the butterfly have? Again, butterfly has five.
Depends on the butterfly. A managed Trims Have 16
1615 kinds of receptors. What would the rainbow look like to them mean?
Could they even see it matter? Sure,
but see the rainbow fine cause they live in very shallow water and so the water
is pretty clear. Almost like air. Huh? They would start the rainbow way, way,
way inside. Where we see violet, they would see
then they would go on through several kinds of ultraviolet,
probably five or six kinds of ultraviolet and then they, we get to violet which,
which is another reaching our colors and go through violet and violet blue and
blue and blue green
where they have those green bean blue blue blues as well.
Yup. [inaudible] never go out into the reds.
So they would be about it. About as red as last when they got to the red house,
but only in the red. Yeah.
What a rainbow that must be. Yeah.
They have the most complicated visual system of any animals by a factor of two
or more. Wait, wait, wait.
He said any do you mean you mean did you mean that unequivocally? Any, yeah.
No other animal that we know of has a visual system within 50% is complicated.
All right. Mantis
[inaudible].
Okay. You know, on the other hand, their brains are tiny, so who knows what,
they may not have the ability to perceive the beauty of the rainbow in the way.
No, I don't. I don't know. Their,
their Venice from certain into violence and how do we interview?
They go around and kill things. That's, I mean really that's what they do.
That's, that's one reason there is so fascinating is how,
how would they have to go around and kill things? What are the shells? Crabs,
other managed shrimps. Shrimps. Octopuses they'll kill octopuses. Yeah.
Small ones.
A good size managed shrimp will can break the wall of an aquarium where really?
Yeah, there's a,
there's ones in California that can break aquarium walls if they hit it hard.
Oh my God.
So you have a pugnacious Mohammed Ali seagoing animal with incredibly great
visual sense
[inaudible]
special thanks to Jim Briggs, our engineer for the acquire session,
which was a blast to mark Shane Jeezy for setting us off in this direction to
Michael Kirschner and the young New Yorkers Chorus and John McClay and the
Greece Church Curl Society and those folks from the collegiate corral them
Odessa of choirs who joined us and to Alex Ambross of WQXR for getting everybody
together. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
[inaudible]. Okay, a very quick
update since we aired this broadcast,
the mystery of the Mantis shrimp,
I has just gotten deeper. As we mentioned,
they don't seem to gaze at sunsets or rainbows.
We now think that maybe they use colors as kind of triggers for particular
actions. One clear says fight another color.
They eat other colors has sex. They'd still have the best eyes in the world,
but what they're doing with those eyes, is it bigger mystery now than ever
there? Where does message I? This is Tom Cronin. Hello. This is Jay [inaudible]
[inaudible]
and the Alfred p Sloan Foundation,
Alfred p Sloan Foundation and added same public understanding of science and
technology.
Yeah.
More information
aboutSloan@wwwdotsloanollon.org with James Glick. Radiolab is produced by w n Y.
[inaudible].
Okay, that's good enough for you. Bye.
Hi, I'm Robert Krulwich. Radiolab is supported by Squarespace.
The simplest way to create a website this do year,
make your next move with Squarespace,
whether that's starting a business or launching a passion project,
no matter what your goals are.
Squarespace's award winning templates can help you present your ideas to the
world.
Beautifully use offer code Radiolab for 10% off your first purchase of a
Squarespace domain or website, squarespace.com make your next move.
Make your next website.
Hey, I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich, Radiolab,
and today we're talking about color. Okay.
And that actually brings us back to Jane Nights, a professor of ophthalmology,
university of Washington, Seattle.
Jay has actually spent his entire career trying to get creatures to seek colors
that they normally can't see. I, well, yeah, and he started,
this is kind of an interesting story,
a by taking some color blind monkeys who couldn't see red. They have blue cones,
green cones, but no red cones, which is not unlike a lot of human males.
In any case,
he had these monkeys and was able to take the human gene for the red cone rabbit
and a virus. We injected into the monkey's eyes and Bam,
the monkeys suddenly had red cones. Yeah, so it had blue,
green and red. Was this like lasix? It was just like a,
a 10 minute outpatient situation for the monkeys. I would say close,
close to Lasik. Could they then now see red? Well,
every single morning before they get their breakfast,
they have to do their color vision test. So
we'd see each monkey at a computer,
we add a touch screen and the screen looks totally gray. Man.
We bought in that field of gray.
He adds a little red blob right now here's the key.
We use grape juice as the reinforcement for the monkeys. But game is, yeah,
the touch the blob before you get your juice. So before the surgery,
they weren't seeing any blobs and they weren't getting any juice because all
they could see was gray.
So a little red blob could be right there in front of them and they'd never see
it. And the morning after there, a lasix color booster shot. Okay,
a tradition, you see it, they
and still couldn't see it.
Day after day they would do their tests and everyday they would fail.
Every day they would fail
and
no blob, no juice. But it's fun for them.
They get out of their cage and they talk to their friends. Did you fail yet?
Fail. You Go, I bet
another day another fail until one morning after about 20 weeks,
Jay woke up,
the monkeys gave them the test and they began to not fail.
Really, if you watch the video of this,
it actually looks like the monkey is like, wow, you know,
I'm not having any failures and check out this dot. Look at this thing there.
Get Out.
But I did get some sense that they felt like that their life had improved.
Nope. If this works so well with the monkeys,
couldn't you take a colorblind human and give them back the thing they're
missing? Absolutely.
We could cure colorblindness in a human with exactly this technique.
We really,
the only thing that we have to do is convince the FDA that the risks are low
enough and the benefit is high enough that it'd be something we could do.
And people have never tried it or no, we've never tried it.
Although I get a lot of emails, let's say I don't care what the risks are,
I've even had offers.
How about if I come to your laboratory and you don't tell anybody late at night
and you give me the shot in the eye and we won't tell anyone?
Which brings us back to our original question.
If you can take a colorblind human and give them normal color vision,
could you take a normal color seer and boost them to make them a little more
shrimpy? Well, yes. Yeah.
He said, sure, why not? But then there's the whole FDA thing.
But here's the real surprise, Jason.
There were some people who already a little bit mantis shrimp,
like there are color mutants,
if I may call them that in the nicest possible way among us or they're out there
in theory. Okay, so here's the deal.
Genes for the cones in our eyes see color. You have the red queen, blue cones.
Yep. They're on the x chromosome. Now men, as we know,
only have one of those women have two x chromosomes,
which means that women have two sets of these cone making jeans.
Normally one said it's just a spare, it's not used,
but still they've got two sets and so said, Aha,
it is theoretically possible. Then some women,
this spare set of genes might mix up, turn on,
morph into a whole new cone, a forth comb.
We're going to call it the yellow cone.
So people with normal color vision are trichromatic cause we've got three cones
or a woman like that would be a tetra Chromat.
So altogether she'd have a blue cone, a green cone, a yellow cone,
and a red cone. But you wouldn't just see more yellow.
This new yellow would mix with the red.
And the blue and the green to create thousands,
maybe millions of more shades of color. This amazing.
The technicolor is not the right word. It's whatever it would be.
The deck scatter color, that would be even more super-duper.
This was just a thought experiment. Yeah. But um,
Jay actually figured out a way to test for this.
We can look in people's blood and I can say this woman has the genes for blue
cones, green cons, yellow cones, red cones. You can do a DNA test. Really?
Yeah. So he started doing blood tests and he found this one woman,
she worked at the same place we did crazy enough at the university.
He looked at her DNA and he saw the gene for the fourth code.
Yeah.
So did she see in super technicolor or how would you even know that was,
that was a problem.
And so we thought of an experiment in order to be able to see whether or not she
had this extra dimension of Color Vision.
He was able to produce these two yellow lights. That to us, you know,
trichromatic normal chromatids look totally identical. We're color blind.
To that difference. But to a Tetra Chromat, a woman with this fourth cone,
they would look totally different. Yeah. So they brought her in. I said,
okay, here it is. Do you see these as different? And she said,
no, no, I don't see them. And he didn't know.
But the story doesn't end there. Good.
Jay told us about a colleague of his in England because she's at Newcastle named
Gabrielle Jordan,
and she apparently found eight of these women with the extra cone.
And out of those eight,
seven of those women behaved exactly like the person that I had tested,
couldn't see the difference.
But one of them took one look at those two yellows and said, no,
they look totally different to me. Oh,
one of these women was saw the assault side as different.
So one of them had the cone,
but you could use it and the other had the cone but couldn't use it. Yup.
So why is that? Yeah, why? Well, this is the part if you'd like,
I could tell you what my theory is of what's going on. Yeah.
So I think that Jace has,
let's just imagine you grew up in a world without color completely and totally
black and white world houses would be painted black and white printers would all
be printing black and white. Even the TV,
they would just have black and white TV. Women's makeup would be
just, you know, either dark or light.
So it wouldn't make any difference if you had color vision because you would
never use that color vision, there'd be no words for color.
[inaudible]
now, just to make an interesting,
let's imagine one day a bright red apple plops into your world.
How would you
react to it? Would you see it? You think? Well,
so that's a very good question. Maybe says Jay,
even though you have the ability to see that Red Apple,
if you've never had a chance to use that ability to practice,
it may just lay doormen and that he thinks might be what happens to women living
with the extra cone in our world.
They're very rarely subjected to colors that would stimulate their extra kind of
cone differently.
So you're saying those other colors just aren't around enough for them? Yeah,
everything that we make is based on the fact that humans are trichromatic.
The television only has three colors.
Our color printers have three different colors.
There is nothing out there that we make artificially that a tetra chromatic
could see.
But Jay says maybe some women because they're just more aware or because of the
job that they do. Maybe someone who works with color all the time,
like a florist or a painter
by little, because they're paying such close attention,
their brain would learn to see that
[inaudible].
So naturally we wanted to find one of these mythic ladies in that mythic.
Maybe the reason I say that is because we tried to find that one woman that he
mentioned, you know, the one out of eight. Yeah.
And we had a really hard time and we began to doubt that she even existed.
And then we began to look online and you see all these websites thing,
are you at Tetra Chromat contact us, contact us,
everybody is searching for these women.
And we began to feel like we were chasing Unicorns a little bit,
but then our producer,
Tim Howard claimed the claim that he had found one calculating. Yeah,
you are right on the Ferris tree. He'd been in touch with Jay.
Jay told him that he'd tested a woman,
determined that she had the fourth cone and this woman was an interior designer.
Oh. But Jay had not yet determined whether she could use her fourth cone.
So we sent Tim to Pittsburgh where she lives right there to see what he can find
out. Hi, I'm Susan Hogan.
I'm a mother of three and an interior designer.
Well she like, she's great. Oh, you have a jukebox.
Really? You want me to play something? How about number three? Oh seven.
It just seems appropriate because it's about color, whiter shade, a pair.
Um, she told me a lot about how she uses color in her work.
You see the different colors of paint because she thinks a lot about it in terms
of painting walls. I know the way the sun is oriented in a room,
each wall look a different color
even though you put in any case, here's my plan. I'd uh,
ordered this test before I went to Pittsburgh that Jay had suggested.
I get at open and over overload.
It involved these little pieces of brown fabric. Okay.
They all look identical. They look strikingly the same to me.
Yeah. Lynn, Brenna, me, Soren was, are completely indistinguishable.
Couldn't see a difference. So look the same to you guys. Yes,
but I'm assuming they're actually not all the same. That's the trick. Jay said,
if you show them to a real tetra Chromat,
they're going to be able to see these subtle differences that you know,
you and I can't see,
and I'm back to Pittsburgh. We head over toward that tree is that
it'll be much more fun. We ended up doing the test in a nearby park.
We're going to do a bunch of these, if you don't mind.
The first trial I took out three of the swatches,
two that were exactly the same and one that was supposedly different.
And when you took it out, could you see the difference? No. No.
So I go behind the tree and I whisper into the mic. Number three.
It's different. Number three, I hope you couldn't hear me.
I'll let you take a look.
She steps back in the swatches gives you the look for a moment and then she says
number three. The third one is different, more neutral,
less red than one and two on the left. One for one luck.
So I went behind the tree,
I on second changed the swatches so that now the middle swatch was the odd one
out and same, same deal. Ready? Set, go.
Which number? It looks different. The middle one. Number two.
You are right. Wow. Okay.
Then I figured I got to make it harder. I switched it up and I made it.
So all three are different and I didn't tell her,
oh three different aisle,
three different green, red, less red,
knocking it out of the park case Tim.
Wow. You found her. I had, I was sure that she was not going to be,
there's no way this test can work. Well,
it actually might not have totally worked.
What did she start to fail there? There's one little thing I didn't mention,
but I brought along a friend, I'm Jason Lacroix,
painter landscape still life thought I'd try him out as a control. Oh,
cause you were thinking, uh,
let's get someone who likes color but as a boy and can't be a tetra chroma.
Right. And, uh, when we tried the exact same test with him,
I mean these three, they look the same, don't they? To, you know,
I see different, he was amazing. Uh,
every time the first one on the left jumped out immediately. Number one,
they all three looked different to me. Wow. Was he just as good as Susan? Yeah,
I always a little bit disappointed. I gotta say there was no where,
where he couldn't do it and she could know. But I mean,
I only had pieces of brown cloth, you know,
so it doesn't prove anything. I guess she still might be a tetra Chromat. Right.
For All I know. And
there was this one moment I had no, it doesn't prove anything, but I asked her,
um,
I asked her about the sky and the sky was just that quintessential sky blue
[inaudible] and she was like, I was like, what do you see? And she's like,
I see. Um, do you see some of the pink and the blue?
See I see a lot of pink. Like among the blue,
there's red in that blue section. She was looking at a blue sky and seeing red.
Yeah. Yeah. Do you see that? No. Oh,
I see so much red like up it and it's,
uh, it's kind of a cop out, but it's just kind of the perfect sky blue.
Okay. That's, that's a good, it's just mixed in there.
That's cool. I think I don't see is any green in that blue? I just see reds,
right? Especially around like white clouded section.
And at that moment I felt like my sky is boring.
I'm so sorry for you. For us. I'm sorry for us.
No, I mean, how do we know that any of this makes sense?
That's the fun of it. I, yeah.
[inaudible].
So in
[inaudible] as a minutes, hold, stay
battle phase at first just goes lead,
turn the water.
Shayda hey
froms man chose man.
She's just mad about me. Call Him.
[inaudible] you know we haven't talked about yet. What's that? Um, where do
well there's come from, I mean like, like I'm guy color. No, no, like,
like painterly colors. Like a, like marine blue and, and, oh,
like artificial colors. Well, no, they're not at, if that's the thing,
you think they come from a factory or something.
But originally the came from the earth. Yeah.
And here's one story about Carly that has haunted me for about a year and a
half. It's so strange. I don't know if it's true or not, but I mean, I,
I don't know if you've seen my book. Of course. That's Victoria Finley again,
her book is called color. And this story
starts with Mil, a particular kind of goop. It's a color called Gumbos.
It's um, it's named after Cambodia, a French word for Cambodia.
And it comes from the SAP of a tree that grows in the Cambodia,
Vietnam, Thailand border area. And this is a yellow color
[inaudible]
how you get it is really the sticky part.
I mean the way they get it is that they cut a slash in the bark and then hitch
up a tube made of bamboo about the circumference of a quarter.
Yes. And then little droplets of goop come. A little tiny drop does a good
wow.
And they fill up the tube the same way you, you know, you get maple syrup or,
or rubber, but they leave it for a couple of years. Years. Yes.
Aw.
All right. So it's a really slow
process. So slow.
It's some pretty strange thing. Drop
can happen in that time. What do you mean chap has secrets?
Secrets. What's secrets? Wait a minute.
So after two long years,
the harvesters come back and each of those tubes is now full of this, um, quite,
um, quite like plastic. It's sort of,
it's got that sort of plastic resonate kind of feel,
but that's just the beginning. The resin makes this incredible transformation,
which we actually saw Sean and I. Hello. Alright, thanks to this guy.
My name is Charles Kramer. I'm a color man. He owns creamers,
pigments in Manhattan and he sells this Cambos.
It is an important yellow,
it's amazing when you use it powdered and the resin form because when you have a
look at it or two this year it's just like listen, the dull it creed brown.
You imagine like a a ball of wax. I mean you think,
oh that's not very interesting coming out of Dusky sort of boring color,
but then you put a drop of water on it or you grind it up in a bowl with a
little water. You look on that. It looks like this blue
this year and there it is. There's a little bit of skips, bright,
very bright yellows, bright fluorescent. Suddenly it's like how,
I mean it is quite an excitedly colored, very, very.
I carried one around for ages. Try to have a look at this color,
look how boring it is now put a drop of water on it showing kids and I was
really happy. I give them, gave it to one kid and he was,
you just said you light it.
And it was only after two that I found out that it's so dangerous. I mean, I,
I used dangerous, why I
still get a bad eye over here
when the guys used to chip in and small pieces,
there was actually a time built in from the visit the toilet at least once an
hour. Ian Garrett knows that because he was technical at this art
supply company called Windsor in Newton in England.
And here's what really got us interested in all this.
Back in the 1980s Winsor and Newton would get these shipments of Cambos from
Cambodia and they would take it, two of them to this production room.
Quite a dusty area. Just had a table in there,
big old table where the workers would set and then they would have this hammer
put big ambush pieces on this lump of iron and then hit it,
shatter it into small pieces because that's how they make it into a kind of
usable, solvable paint.
And one day one of the workers was chipping and scraping at the Renton.
There they were. They found something in the resin that they didn't expect.
They found bullets,
bullets like in the hunks of resin,
you're judged in them yet sometime in that two year drip drip process toward the
end probably as the resume is getting thick,
a bullet went whizzing through the air, went into the goop and stayed there.
Actually it wasn't just one bullet. Now is total amount.
It doesn't and those are just the ones that you found lying around the factory.
There were probably many more. They fall into two salts.
That's a very sharp pointed one about just over an inch long and then the other
type of a small sort of barrel shapes,
which are about three quarters of an inch long and half a dozen of each and how
they got there and what they pass through on the way into the GAM. Bougie.
I'm not sure
[inaudible].
Well we do know of course was that those years in Cambodia where years of war
and murder, a million and a half people die there.
Most of them in the killing fields.
And that's the same place where you'd find the Gimbutas trees.
It's shocking really any cause it,
those were just the random little bamboo tubes hanging on the trees.
What happened in that grove?
The proposition here would be that at some point,
maybe because of the famous killing fields that some 14 year olds with collision
of cough rifles after finishing a series of murders or just shot lots of people
have just sprayed that growth in order to get into the little tiny bamboo
canisters collecting this gun Bush,
they would've had to have sprayed that entire grove with machine machine gun
bullets and in that year or two years somebody,
um, no ditch people I should think. Well, I mean they, they,
it's not necessarily a battle scenario. It could have been target practice.
You see these things hanging on the side of the tree. You, you,
you want to practice your, uh, marksmanship.
But I mean there is a way in which the, there's violence in this color. I guess.
There's fun. It makes me wonder about the, does it ever give you pause?
Did they ever give me what, sorry. Pause. Pause. No, uh,
not, we would too. Remote bought it from a guy in Holland, new,
bought it from an exporter who got it from Lord knows where in Cambodia,
but the idea that it could have been attached to
to that bloodshed. Does that bother you at all?
You're saying, do I think it's morally acceptable?
Is that what you're asking me? Yeah. Um, no.
It wasn't Winsor Newton who discovered these things?
These things were demanded by customers.
You're a hard-hearted man. I feel
I had never thought about it until you, you pitched it like that.
As we kept on talking, he made it clear.
It wasn't that he hadn't thought about the violence per se,
it's just that it wasn't like breaking news to him.
They sell some big mitts that come straight out of hills that are right in the
middle of war zones. Okay. Colors are sometimes soaked in blood.
That's just how it is.
On the other side of the coin.
I've made it my career in 40 years to make artists paints on the basis that
people who paint tend not to make war.
It's a peaceful occupation.
Yeah, that is more or less what
the Euston George Kremer who runs the paint shop,
he was pretty much of the same mind. You could think of it this way.
Imagine the first person to ever find this brilliant yellow maybe 10,000 years
ago.
He's walking through the forest after it's rained and he sees it there on a tree
and he's amazed,
so he puts his finger into the yellow and then Dab some on his face and he feels
instantly beautiful like larger than himself.
It is about being related to something 10 centers
and that's his.
George is the other side of the coin to an upper high or what ever.
Therefore you probably used it from all sorts of ceremonies,
marriages, feasts, me be warpaint to feel invincible any moment.
He suspects that needed to be pulled out of the ordinary and lifted up and there
the, you need something that is pride,
something what is beautiful and special.
And this yellow gives you something special.
[inaudible]
it is a perfect [inaudible]
thank you to Victoria Findlay. Her book is called color, short and simple,
one to Ian Garrett, um,
of Windsor and Newton who did not wither under our of withering moral attack.
On the contrary,
this is Amy Plantinga from Boston, Massachusetts.
Radiolab is supported in part by the Alfred p Sloan Foundation,
enhancing public understanding of science and technology in the modern world.
More information aboutSloan@wwwdotsloan.org
hi, I'm Robert Krulwich. Radiolab is supported by Squarespace.
The simplest way to create a website this new year,
make your next move with Squarespace,
whether that's starting a business or launching a passion project,
no matter what your goals are.
Squarespace's award winning templates can help you present your ideas to the
world.
Beautifully use offer code Radiolab for 10% off your first purchase of a
Squarespace domain or website. squarespace.com make your next move.
Make your next website.
[inaudible]
yeah.
Hey, I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich. This is Radiolab.
We're going to keep going with our show on colors now with a story about, well,
hey blue, the color of the sky, most beautiful color. No
red. Nah. Yeah, you got it.
It's a story that we find really surprising frankly.
And it comes from my producer Tim Howard. Yes. Hello. Who a heard it from?
Do you want it set up? Who? This guy is a.
So Guy Deutscher is a linguist and a writer and uh,
I came across his book or through the language glass and he tells us one
particular story in it that, uh,
starts in I think 1858 with this Guy William Gladstone,
who was incredibly famous politician in England.
It was four times prime minister in the second half of the 19th century.
Every school kid knows who he is even now.
But there's one thing that not many people know about Gladstone. Well, he was a,
a home of fanatic.
Where's the soldiers marched?
The gleam went dazzling from the magnificent bronze all about through the upper
air to the heavens. He was a deeply religious man. And for him,
the Elliot in Odyssey one was like a second Bible sipping the black blood.
The tall shade perceive me and cried out Shockley he read them over and over
over
again throughout his life. So he was in the homer. Yes.
And so early on in his career,
Gladstone decided to write the definitive history of Homer's huge book,
actually three books,
thousands of pages where he discussed a whole range of issues to home and his
world. And here's the thing, as he was reading,
doing his research and everything, he made this very strange discovery
that the way home I talks about color in the Iliad and the Odyssey is extremely
odd. It's odd. Very, very odd. How so?
To start with uses extremely strange terms,
fall colors of have simple objects and most famous one perhaps is the wome dark
sea, the wine, wine, dark wine, dark seeds. It looks like wine.
Looks like wine is possibly like a, a poetic kind of thing.
That's what you would naturally think. But the other thing he calls, um,
wine color, uh, oxen,
but, but it's more than just a wine take the color violet,
which to me and probably the USA Purple Light Purple. When homer uses it,
he talks about the sheep and cyclops rams in the cyclops caves as having dark,
violent. Whoa. But that's just fantasy. I mean,
but the other thing that he also says is violet is iron iron.
So chew on that or how about this one?
What is both the color of honey and the color of a faces Pale with fear.
I had no idea. If you ask homer, those are green,
green honey. He didn't call his forest green,
he didn't call his leaves green. Um, it all seems to be wrong. And um,
this was totally puzzling to Gladstone. Hobo was Gladstone's absolute hero.
So he found it difficult to understand or accept why someone who was so
perceptive would use such defective terms as Gladston call it.
Yeah.
So he starts going through the Iliad and the Odyssey.
You get page by page and he counts how many times each color appears.
I mean like how many times he uses the word black or blue or whatever. Yeah.
And um,
it only takes a couple pages for him to notice the predominance of black and
white that the term black carrion flies. He's black, Brown,
black, black, black, black, black,
black occurred about 170 times in both books. White,
white arms, wiped club,
the white say curd about 100 times,
but red,
a blood red serpent only clocks in at about 13 times the red wine to the big
drop. Yellow dorm in her yellow robe under 10 times.
Green's teeth chatter in green fear also under 10.
And then Gladstone realizes something crazy. The color blue.
Um,
the zero times what?
There's just no word that describes the color blue in any of Homer's poems.
He does not use the word blue at all. No blue, no blue.
Not even once. Nope. So Gladstone Thought, Huh? Bizarre. Yeah.
And he started looking in other classic Greek texts too.
And there he kept finding all of these strange uses of color,
violet hat and things like that.
And after thinking about this for a long time,
Gladstone concluded that homo was kind of blind,
but also that all the Greeks were kind of blind.
He thought all of them were colorblind. Yes.
That they saw the world in black and white, maybe with a touch of red.
His thought was that they were straining to see these other colors that were
kind of just outside of their reach.
And then their kid would inherit that effort or their kid would just be a little
bit better. So that's how we got color.
So homer junior would be able to see a little bit of yellow because homer tried
really hard to see yellow. And then homer,
the third would be better than home or the second,
and then this would happen again. And again, every generation down,
3000 years to the present day, it just seemed the only, you know, the,
the only possible explanation bets. Ridiculous. It's ridiculous.
We know today of course, having that, that the, uh,
kind of vision goes back probably about 30 million years, you know,
to like when we were still in the jungle climbing trees. Exactly. So, um,
generally people mock
[inaudible].
No one took him seriously.
So then how did people explain the no blue and homer thing? Well,
here at the plot thickens 10 years after Gladstone's homered debacle,
this other guy and gem and Joyce philology is called Lazarus guy again,
Lazarus Geiger, a German Jewish, what did he say?
Philologists which I thought was a linguist.
It basically means he studies ancient texts.
He finds pretty much the same kind of weird stuff that Gladstone did,
but he finds it not just in ancient Greek texts, but all over the place. Sorry,
this one he looked at and the old Icelandic Sagas
[inaudible] ancient Chinese,
ancient vedic hymns, the Bible,
a Sheltie by tonight. And surprise,
surprise what she defined there. No blue.
Even the Bible had no blue in the original Hebrew Kona.
It has no blue. So where, what's this? What's this room?
Right now we're in the public catalog room.
I actually went to the New York Public Library and talk to this librarian at SOA
end to Vic [inaudible] to speak German. So and fic longer shake the dementia.
And we got out Geiger's book history of mankind. Wait a second.
I know this voice. Really, that's my girlfriend.
My name is Brooke Watkins and I'm a librarian at the New York public library.
She helped me find some very cool passages in book suit at first.
Let's do it in germ guy again. This amazing quotation. Okay.
She passed about the Indian vedic poems, Ds,
Alita Zane towels and vans and Dalston bish Dane. What does that say?
She's hymns of more than 10,000 lines are brimming with descriptions of the
heavens. Scarcely is there any subject of vogue more frequently?
The Sun and reddening, dawn's play of color, day and night. Cloud and lightning.
The air in the ether and are unfolded before us and over and over and splendor
and did it fullness.
There's only one thing that no one would ever learn from those ancient songs who
do not already know it. And that is that the sky is blue.
Who? Who?
It gets weirder.
You already and totally ready. Alright. Cause Geiger then wondered,
all right if there's no blue in any of these old texts,
then when did blue come into these languages? Yeah.
So he did this massive analysis to trace when each color term was first
introduced to each language.
And what he found was that the order at which languages seem to acquire these
kind of terms is not entirely random.
[inaudible]
first black and white. Every language has black and white.
Then when they get their first color term, red always comes fast.
Always red after red. It's always yellow. Really? Yeah.
And then green and blue. Only the very end. So black, white, red,
green, yellow and then blue. Yeah. And that's universal. Well,
as people discovered more and more languages, they found some exceptions,
but a couple of things held even from Geiger out of these colors.
Red Is always first and blue is always last. Why?
Well, why would there be an order at all and why would blue always be last?
Well, here's where you get to the guessing part. Okay.
I think some might have to do with a couple of things. First in Homer's world,
you wouldn't have actually been exposed to a lot of blue things. Actually,
if you think about it, blue is extremely rare in nature. Blue foods,
no blue animals. And how about plants?
There's a few blue plants like what I flowers that are really blue eyes.
Extremely rare. A lot of flowers that we think of as blue.
They're actually artificial flowers. We made them blue. Ah, genetically man.
Yeah. What about Blue Eyes? Blue Eyes at the time. Way In short supply, um,
among the Greeks. But here's where we get the guy's main point.
He says you don't really need a word for a color until you can make that color
reliably. And the reason they're red might've been first is that red is a,
frankly one of the easiest to produce.
You can just take a dried piece of red clay and you can use that as a Korean,
which is why paints made out of oak or go back something like 60,000 years.
And blue blue is the hardest of all. Um, for thousands of years,
no one had it. One exception, the Egyptians, the Egyptians, and they,
and only they had their own word for blue. So that's it. That's your answer.
Yeah. Like no blue dyes. No blue words.
That's not interesting. I want more than that. What do you mean more?
I don't know. Something more to say than just, it's about,
there you go.
As I was calling around,
I ran into something that made me think a little differently about Gladstone's
whole theory of colorblindness call. This guy named Jules Davidoff,
professor of newest psychology, London University.
And a few years back he got interested in this particular tribe in Namibia
called the Himba.
Not many languages in the world. They don't have a different word for blue.
You might think of them as like a very poor stand in for homer. Alright,
and to make a long story short, Joseph went to Namibia.
He sat down with a bunch of members of the Himba tribe,
whipped out a laptop and showed them 12 colored squares for one.
And there's actually some really cool video footage of his research assistant
doing this. And they asked them very simply,
which one is different now that you look at this and you see the 11 of these
squares are green. My colleague, we would call Glee, very green,
and the other one is blue. This blue one, it's shouting. It's like, Hey,
I'm mu over here. I'm blue.
It's easy enough for us to do. It's a no brainer,
but the Himba who don't have a separate word for blue in their language,
they find this distinction and it's difficult. When they stare at this screen,
they just stare and stare.
They don't see the difference in the green. No. Well,
was there something wrong with their eyes? No, definitely not.
We completely blew that out.
They don't see color and individual colors differently,
but then way it's so easy to say that they're seeing different colors to us and
then not, well then how does he explain it? Okay. When we,
when we decide to put colors together in a group and then give those colors a
word like blue, something happens. He says,
what happens is that now that there's a category for that thing,
the thing in the category
out, it gets louder and louder to your eyes.
The category actually feeds back on your perception. So you notice it more.
You're saying that having the word for blue unlocks your ability to see blue.
I mean it, that's how it feels to me. And Joel says, no,
no car that he says without the word,
you're still seeing the blue no matter what. You're just not. Um,
noticing it.
Your eyes are just kind of glossing right over it so you don't see it.
It's, it's, it's, it's harder to spot. It says jewels, whatever.
I don't quite understand that difference.
But in blue would not jump out and say high five the way it does with us.
But if it doesn't jump out to that extent,
then this is starting to sound very Gladstone. He to me,
I mean maybe he was a little right. Like,
cause if homer had no word for blue and the word somehow enables the blueness of
the blue, then maybe his world was less blue than it would be for us. I mean,
maybe the blue went through his eyes in the same way,
but perhaps didn't get into his mind in the same way. Yeah.
Blue didn't matter.
Wait a second. Do you know where this breaks down?
Where the sky, I mean,
you look up and there's the bluest blue in the world and then it's right there
above our head. It's been there since the dawn of time.
So why wouldn't blue matter more? I mean,
why wouldn't it be the first color instead of the last? Well,
that's what I thought too. And I ask guy about that. Yeah. Why is the sky blue?
Is, is the, the,
the first question that be the first question that all children ask. Yeah.
But I wanted to see how obvious or striking this blueness of the skies.
So I decided to make an experiment.
Uh,
guy has a very young daughter, but 18 months she was learning to speak.
What's her name?
[inaudible] I talked a lot about colors with Ama and taught her all the colors,
including blue.
And we would play all these games then that dads play with the children,
you know, pointing at objects. I would point it to a blue object and ask him,
what's the color of this? You'd say boo boo for blue. Uh, okay. Soon enough,
Alma was a total pro. She could identify any color, show me the red object,
show me that this. And the only thing I didn't do,
and I asked my wife not to do was ever mentioned that the sky was blue.
That was the setup. So one day guy in Elmo,
we're taking a stroll and they're practicing the colors. What's this tree?
What's this, what's this? And then I pointed at the sky and said,
what kind of is that?
And she wouldn't give me any answer. Huh.
Although she just a second before would was happily telling me that something
was blue on red or green.
She just looked up and looked at me in comprehending Lee sort of,
what are you talking about? She thought you're kidding.
I think she didn't understand what I was on about. Huh? In retrospect,
there was no object that there was nothing with color for her.
You're just pointing into the void, basically pointing into nothingness.
So she wouldn't say anything,
but guy kept asking every single time they went out.
Of course I would do it only when the sky was blue and she would never answer.
And this one on for two months.
And then finally you did consent to give me a color name, but it wasn't blue.
It was white for four a few times you said white.
And then finally after a month and a half or two moments, she,
she said blue for the first time. Wow.
Even then it wasn't consistently blue. So she then she said once blue,
no white, no blue. Did she eventually decide though? You know what,
that is blue. Well, no, she never said it this way,
but eventually when I asked it became consistently it.
So she just would say blue. Okay.
This was for me really the point why I could, you know,
convince myself or to convince,
at least in my heart that this sort of allegedly perfect example of blue,
um, is not so perfect. So, you know, for Houma, who, you know,
never ever probably saw a blue object except the sky and the sea.
Never had a dad who sort of went on and bought blue objects and asking what the
color of the sky was. The fact that he didn't lose sleep over.
It doesn't seem so strange anymore.
You know, it's kind of, it's a, now that I've heard this, I'm a little,
I'm a little, uh, ruining the,
the moment when Alma decided to sky was blue,
let her have whatever color she wants it to be.
Doesn't have to be blue weirdly then color is a loss of innocence.
Yeah. It's Kinda like having something fixed.
That for awhile is just between you and your friends.
Heat harsh, you know, just this guy has many colors. Truthfully.
On the other hand though, I'm disagreeing with myself now.
If we all agree the sky is blue,
then that's something we can share that she can share.
And then she's in conversation and then eventually she'll understand, you know,
this kind of blue
[inaudible] [inaudible]
yeah, there aren't, but there,
but you know what one would know what it feels like. Yeah. Not a happy night.
Ah.
[inaudible]
guardian. Stop the stones.
Hello?
[inaudible] I lost you.
He lost all his good [inaudible] you said
no and there's hurt too blue like him.
I am doubtful that Yo love is true to
[inaudible] side too.
Call me.
[inaudible] I think it's the most beautiful color. [inaudible] Ah,
I think I just took read just to be contrary. I'm fine.
Let it like my favorite color is, I don't only when you say
love me
[inaudible] can prove it by God. Out on the slide.
[inaudible]
[inaudible] call me me.
[inaudible] I want to thank all the musicians who were so generous to let us use
their music this hour and joined in and our covers of the rainbow project.
You heard Reggie Watts with rainbow connection. Barbara Benary
with over the Rainbow Lonesome organists with green onions,
nymph with brown rice, yellow ostrich with sound and vision rye,
a brass band with painted black Nico Muli with big yellow taxi shearwater with
black as the color. Eric Freelander with blue in green.
Marcy playground with whiter shade of Pale, the heap with mellow yellow towel.
When with blue snow blink.
You just heard with Blue Moon Dan Deacon right here with colors busman's
holiday. Mr Blue and our very own Tim Howard, Aka Soul Taro
[inaudible].